>>>>[THEME MUSIC] And I think
many people today don't
know what to believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>It felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>GEORGE NOORY: Hey, welcome
back to "Beyond Belief."
I'm George Noory.
In this edition, an old friend
of mine is with us, Jim Karol.
He's a mentalist.
And let me tell you something.
He's been on "Coast to Coast"
with me a number of times,
and he has done some
amazing things on the radio.
But wait until you see him on
"Beyond Belief," because we're
going to be doing some
special types of things.
I want to call them tricks, Jim.
What are they?
>>JIM KAROL: Well, I just
call them extraordinary feats
of the mind.
I start off with a trick.
I'm only going to do
one magic trick, then
from that point on,
everything else is going
to be like a feat of the mind
based on your mental abilities,
your science, memory,
things like that.
>>NOORY: Where I'll
be saying, wow.
>>KAROL: I hope.
>>NOORY: Oh, wow.
Now, you're a mentalist,
but are you a magician, too?
What's the difference?
>>KAROL: OK, I started
off as a magician.
Well, it started
off-- wow-- about 31.
At the age of 31, I worked in a
steel mill at Bethlehem Steel.
I lived in Allentown,
Pennsylvania.
>>NOORY: My Navy buddies
used to work there, too.
>>KAROL: Oh, my gosh.
Really?
And so what
happened, George, was
I met this guy who
was a magician,
and I showed him a
couple card tricks.
He showed me.
And then he told me
he had a magic shop.
So I would start going to his
magic shop every Saturday,
blowing probably 1/4 of my
paycheck there, all right?
And thank God for that.
>>NOORY: But steelworkers
did well then.
>>KAROL: We did really well.
>>NOORY: In those days.
>>KAROL: Right.
Then what had had happened
was I got married,
my wife was pregnant
with our second child,
and I got laid off, like the
Billy Joel song "Living Here
in Allentown."
I lost my job, didn't
know what to do.
So I took her Avon account,
and I went door to door.
Could you imagine me
knocking on the door?
Hey, you wanna buy some Avon?
Look at me.
I don't know if the
women felt sorry for me
or if they liked my card tricks.
I would show card tricks.
>>NOORY: Or they wanted
to get rid of you,
so they bought fast
and then out you went.
>>KAROL: But it did really well.
And so what happened
was, they ended up
hiring me to do a show for
1,000 women doing card tricks.
And here I am,
3,500 shows later.
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>KAROL: It's amazing. yeah.
>>NOORY: Were you
good in the beginning?
How long did it take you to
really get this stuff down?
>>KAROL: You know what?
I was always shy all
my life and backwards,
and the magic, the
card tricks, by seeing
the emotion and the
expression on people's faces,
I believe that that
actually built up
my self-esteem, and confidence,
and everything else,
which now that's
kind of what I do.
It's amazing how it all started.
And it got better and better
and better over the years.
And we can show you this now,
because it's a magic thing.
I'd rather get the
magic out of the way.
Could I show you
a magic thing now?
>>NOORY: All right, show
me a magic trick now.
>>KAROL: That way
it's out of the way.
Do you know what I mean?
>>NOORY: Here, let's move this.
>>KAROL: Like here
are the cards.
They're not magic
cards or any tricks.
>>NOORY: They're just cards.
>>KAROL: Yeah,
they're just cards.
But what we're going to try
to do here is an experiment.
Let's do it this way.
I got a good idea.
George, if you were to remove
one card out of the deck right
now-- it doesn't matter
what the card is.
Take one.
>>NOORY: And hide it from you?
>>KAROL: Yeah,
don't let me see it.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>KAROL: Now, I'll turn around.
Show it to the camera.
Don't let me see the card.
>>NOORY: I'm not gonna
tell you what it is.
You'll have to peek at it.
>>KAROL: I'm gonna take
the card back from you
like this, all right?
Better still, we're gonna
rip it up in pieces, George.
I'm gonna try
something really cool.
This is one of the first
magic tricks right here.
You can hold the pieces so
we don't forget the card.
Now, I'm gonna
take these pieces,
and I'm gonna put them
down here by my pocket.
>>NOORY: All right, he's
putting them in his pocket.
>>KAROL: And now I'm
going to take out this.
Now watch.
I don't want to touch-- here,
take that banana with you
other hand-- with
your other hand.
Now hold the two like this.
Now watch.
Come close to it like this,
and just make a beeping sound.
>>NOORY: Me?
>>KAROL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Beep.
Beep.
>>KAROL: Now watch.
It's done.
>>NOORY: What's done?
>>KAROL: Put your piece down
right there in front of you.
>>NOORY: This piece?
>>KAROL: Yeah.
Peel the banana
that's been sitting.
Tommy got me the banana.
This is not my banana.
>>NOORY: Peel the banana?
>>KAROL: Yeah, peel the banana.
>>NOORY: Well, I haven't
had breakfast yet.
>>KAROL: I have some
napkins here, too,
just in case it gets a
little messy, all right?
And then just rip the
banana in half, George.
Now think about what
we're doing here.
>>NOORY: You want me
to break it in half.
>>KAROL: Yeah, rip it in half.
Tommy got me the banana.
We just picked any card.
I don't know what it is.
And you can set that on
the napkin here, all right?
Now take that other banana, and
now like take a bite out of it.
Or rip more.
Rip it in half again.
Watch.
You're gonna love this.
You're gonna rip
the banana in half.
>>NOORY: You've
gotta be kidding me.
>>KAROL: I'm serious.
Rip it one more time.
Go ahead.
I don't want to
touch the banana.
You'll think it's a trick.
>>NOORY: Well, I'm not
gonna bite it after you've
touched it, that's for sure.
All right, what am I--?
>>KAROL: Do you notice
anything inside there, George?
Nothing?
Let's see.
Look.
>>NOORY: Oh, come on.
>>KAROL: Pull it out.
Isn't that amazing?
>>NOORY: All right.
Come on.
>>KAROL: Now open it up.
And show the camera.
The card is actually
totally restored.
There's a piece missing.
It didn't totally restore.
You know why it didn't
totally restore, George?
Because that one
piece you kept out.
Let's see if it matches.
It's a perfect match.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
>>KAROL: See?
See?
>>NOORY: This is
"beyond belief."
>>KAROL: And that's what
I started with, George.
That was a magic trick.
>>NOORY: I rip open a-- let
me wipe my hands here, Jimmy.
I rip open this banana.
I picked the 10 of clubs card.
The torn piece was in my hand.
I had the card with the
exact rip inside that banana.
There's no way that you
could have done that.
>>KAROL: It's a trick.
That's all it is, is a trick.
The stuff we're
going to show you
later are not tricks like that.
They're a little
more mental related.
That's why I call
myself a mentalist.
A mentalist basically--
>>NOORY: That's a trick
what you just did.
>>KAROL: That was a magic trick
that I could teach you how
to do, and with a
little practice--
>>NOORY: You teach
me that, I'll be
the king of any bar I go into.
>>KAROL: I'm telling you.
Yeah, you could make
that card basically
appear anywhere you want.
That's what's really
cool about it.
You could make that card
appear anywhere you want.
>>NOORY: Now here's
the question, though.
How did you get the
banana as a trick?
How did you get the card, the
10 of clubs, in the banana?
>>KAROL: Well, I
don't want to tell you
that in front of everybody.
I said I'll teach you that.
>>NOORY: And let
me say something.
This is my observation.
It was pretty gooey,
which tells me
it had been in there some time.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Is that right?
>>KAROL: No, because
Tommy got the bananas.
That's what's cool.
Ask Tommy.
>>NOORY: You didn't
come with bananas.
>>KAROL: No, I didn't
>>NOORY: You didn't
fly here with bananas.
>>KAROL: No, I didn't.
By the time I flew-- I got
stuck in Chicago four hours.
That banana would
have been done.
>>NOORY: You gotta teach me.
Was it slight of hand?
>>KAROL: There's a little slight
of hand, a little bit of magic.
It's a cool thing to learn.
It's one of the first
things I've ever done--
>>NOORY: It's the greatest
trick I've ever seen.
>>KAROL: I appreciate that.
Down at the steel
mill, I would make
cards appear in everything,
I mean, cantaloupes.
Like in my show, I have jumbo
cards, and they rip them up
and it appears in a
cantaloupe or a watermelon.
>>NOORY: But it wasn't just
the card in the banana.
It was the fact that it
had the tear out of it.
>>KAROL: I know.
>>NOORY: And I had that piece.
>>KAROL: Well, that's what makes
it convincing at the end then,
yeah.
But I call that
trick Card in Banana.
But that's how I started.
In other words, you
asked how we started.
This is the thing I did
for women selling Avon.
And they were, oh, my God!
And they'd buy Avon off of me.
>>NOORY: But that's magic.
>>KAROL: That's a magic trick.
>>NOORY: But you're
also a mentalist.
So tell me what that is.
>>KAROL: OK, what
had happened was--
I'd been doing this for a while.
And then what happened was about
the age of 49, right around I
was about to turn 50, I started
getting these like chest pains.
So I'm traveling all
around the country
performing, doing
these card tricks.
In fact, they nicknamed
me Psychic Madman
at one time because there was
a lot of [INAUDIBLE] in 1990.
>>NOORY: I remember calling
you that, Psychic Madman.
>>KAROL: Yeah, yeah.
Well, back in '90, I
had a little dream,
and for some reason, I
dreamt, and all of a sudden
the phone is
ringing in my dream.
I'm like, hello?
And then the voice goes,
Jim, you were right.
The Pennsylvania daily
number was 2, 2, 2.
I woke up, I'm like,
you, that was--
so I wrote it down on the side
of the bed, fell back asleep.
I woke up in the morning,
and I was rushing around
because I had a show at
Villanova University.
And my wife was making the
bed, and she goes, what's this?
And she showed me the note, and
it said 2, 2, 2, December 22,
Pennsylvania Daily Number.
I'm like, wow.
All of a sudden
the dream clicked.
So I went to show, hey,
play 2, 2, 2 December 22.
It was in November.
And at 31 shows, I would hold
up this sign, play 2, 2, 2,
play 2, 2, 2.
And on December 22, I had
a show, so before the show
I wanted to go buy the
Daily Number for myself
just in case it came up.
>>NOORY: You were
curious, right?
>>NOORY: And there were like 75
or 100 people standing in line.
I'm like, oh, my God.
So I went to buy my
cantaloupes for the trick
that I just showed you, and
I didn't get the number,
because I didn't
have time to wait.
So when I got home, I
looked at my voice mail.
And it's blinking, so I hit it.
And it goes, you have 67
messages in your mailbox.
>>NOORY: Oh, my gosh.
>>KAROL: Usually I
got six or seven.
And I started
playing them, and I
swear, the third message
goes, Jim, you were right.
The Pennsylvania Daily
Number was 2, 2, 2.
And it was the same
voice as in the dream.
It ended up being a
gentleman named Ken Hans.
He was a fire chief out
of the fire department
that I did a holiday party for.
And then all of a sudden I
checked all the messages,
all these calls.
We're getting calls from
all these newspapers.
So that's why I got the
Psychic Madman name.
And then I kept doing that
show as the Psychic Madman.
And then like getting back to
the other thing, when I hit 49,
I had these pains, right?
>>NOORY: Were you
having a heart problem?
>>KAROL: I go to the
doctor, and he said, you
have cardiomyopathy
and an enlarged heart.
I'm like, well, an
enlarged heart, at least
I have a big heart.
That's good.
He goes, no.
>>NOORY: Secretariat did, too.
>>KAROL: So I go,
what's cardiomyopathy?
He goes, you have the
heartbeat of a 90-year-old man.
I go, well, that's not good.
>>NOORY: Oh, my God.
>>KAROL: So I went home.
I'm like, I'll just like--
>>NOORY: You were
depressed, right?
>>KAROL: A little bit.
I got four kids.
The guy goes, enjoy the ride.
>>NOORY: Was it hereditary?
>>KAROL: No.
>>NOORY: Anyone in
your family have that?
>>KAROL: It was from eating
junk food like I did.
I mean, you're
talking to a guy that
used to eat 40 Yocco's
hot dogs a week.
I don't know how many
Philadelphia cheesesteaks
from living close to Philly.
So I knocked all of
that out of the diet.
And what had happened
was I started
doing this exercise bike.
So I would take these
cards like this on my bike.
This is a true story.
And here, we'll mix
them up a little more.
Here, cut the deck.
This is really cool, very
important for this story.
Now watch.
Now as you look through the
cards, look at the colors.
>>NOORY: Hold them
right up here, Jim.
>>KAROL: Right here?
Look at the colors as they go
by, like we've got red cards,
black, all the different colors.
I was doing this
on my bike where
I would try to memorize
these colors really fast as I
went through them like that.
Like watch, I'm done.
Believe it or not, I just
memorized all 52 colors.
We shuffled the cards.
You cut them.
It this camera on?
Is that a black card?
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>KAROL: Now, you might
say, well, you looked at it.
Well, yeah, I did.
Let's do something different.
The next card is red.
Next card is red.
Next card is black.
Let's do something harder.
3 of spade, 10 of heart,
10 of club, jack, a heart.
Then I believe it's
an ace of spade.
A 2 of diamond, a 4 of club.
You get the idea,
the king of diamonds.
>>NOORY: Jeez.
>>KAROL: King of spade, right?
King of diamond?
Now, 2 of hearts, 9 of
diamond, jack and 7 of spades
and the queen of hearts, a
7 of diamond, an 8 of heart,
and now you know it's for real.
See, you never
knew on the radio.
Then a jack of club, a king
of heart, a 6 of queen,
and a spade, an 8 of club, an
ace of diamond, a 5 of heart.
You get the idea.
This is what I did
every day on the bike.
I would practice memorizing
these cards really fast.
>>NOORY: You trained yourself.
>>KAROL: And I trained my brain.
Then I got to a point,
after doing this,
that I wanted to
do other things.
So I made up flash cards and
put countries and capitals.
And I would memorize
the countries,
like Uruguay, Montevideo;
Paraguay, Asuncion, Azerbaijan,
Baku; Uzbekistan, Tashkent;
Qatar, Doha; Bolivia, La Paz.
I learned all the
countries and capitals
from these flash cards.
Then I put movies on
there, celebrities,
and I started memorizing Oscars.
Then I got into
sports, all the Super
Bowls, all the Hall of Famers.
>>NOORY: Your brain
must be like that.
Have you ever had an MRI?
>>KAROL: Yeah, I actually did.
I had it done down in Florida
at the Florida Hospital.
And my frontal lobe, parietal
lobe, the temporal lobes,
and occipital lobes, the
cortex is four times thicker
than average from doing
all this brain exercise.
>>NOORY: You increased it.
>>KAROL: Yeah, so this is real.
It's real.
So I started off with magic,
and I got into the memory
because of working this bike and
learning all this information.
I was nailing down 100
digits of pi a day, George.
You know pi,
3.14152653589793238462643383279.
You can copy this down.
I never miss a digit.
So I'm like, OK--
>>NOORY: You're like
a human computer.
>>KAROL: Yeah, like Google.
I start tapping into this
energy from doing this.
And it got to this-- I
call it a mental matrix.
Now, so the story continues.
So now I'm 60.
I'm turning 60.
My life insurance runs out.
I'm like, oh, darn.
So I went to renew
my life insurance,
and they turned me down.
I go, what do you mean?
>>NOORY: Because of the prior.
>>KAROL: Because of the
condition, the heart condition.
I said, I don't have that
heart condition anymore.
What are you talking
about you don't have it?
I said, look, I want to go
in and get another echo.
All right, so I go in.
This is a true story.
I go in to get the echo.
It's the same guy that gave
me the echo 10 years before.
He looks at me.
He goes, what the heck?
He goes, you look younger
than you did 10 years ago.
What have you been doing?
I told him the whole
story, riding the bike,
doing all this memory,
force-feeding my brain,
tapping into this energy.
All of a sudden the guy
looks at me, like-- I go,
what's the matter?
He goes, I don't see
any cardiomyopathy.
>>NOORY: It's gone.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
And he goes, but what's
even more amazing, he goes,
this is the first time
I've ever seen a reversal
of an enlarged heart.
He goes, whatever you're
doing, keep doing it.
It's working.
So that really motivated me and
inspired me to go even further.
So then instead of just putting
an hour a day into this and 25,
30 miles on the bike, I
took it to an extreme.
I'm down in my basement
lifting weights.
>>NOORY: And this was
your career, too, right?
>>KAROL: Yeah, exactly.
So I would take
this memory stuff
and incorporate it in my show.
And gradually it evolved
into this Psychic Madman
and took it out to
a point now where
I'm with all the top doctors.
And I go to hospitals
and talk about it.
Now studying the brain, George.
But like here, here's
is the one thing,
like when you take
all the cards.
We'll show the camera over here,
because a lot of these things
are so amazing
sometimes that people
think it's got to be all
the same card or-- here.
Like if you were to take
one of the cards out
of the deck, anyone you
want-- and that's what's cool.
You're taking any card.
We're shuffling them up.
No two are alike.
Look at the card.
Show it to one of your cameras.
We got it?
>>NOORY: (WHISPERING)
Don't tell him what it is.
>>KAROL: Now put it anywhere
you want in the deck-- anywhere
you want.
And once again,
mix them up, even.
>>NOORY: No, I'll just
do just like that.
>>KAROL: Now that's pretty
fair, you've got to admit.
>>NOORY: Yeah.
>>KAROL: Now I'm gonna
show you a miracle.
Watch.
That's my size 15 shoe.
>>NOORY: You're Big Foot.
>>KAROL: [LAUGHING] That's good.
All right, now what
we're going to do
is pick up your cards
right now, George.
>>NOORY: The whole thing?
>>KAROL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: OK.
>>KAROL: Now kind of like
flick them at the shoe,
like throw the whole
deck and hit me right
in the bottom of the foot.
>>NOORY: You want them to
just go all over the place?
>>KAROL: Yeah, yeah,
we'll clean them up later.
>>NOORY: Here we go, folks.
>>KAROL: OK, did you feel that?
There, I got it.
Here it is.
I got it right there.
Now watch-- nothing in my hands.
I don't even know
what the card was,
but there is a card in there.
>>NOORY: May I?
>>KAROL: You pull it out.
It's a little warm.
Is that the card?
I don't know.
>>NOORY: That's the card.
>>KAROL: Are you serious?
>>NOORY: 5 of hearts, folks.
>>KAROL: But this is the kind of
stuff that I got into, George.
>>NOORY: Now, let me
ask you a question.
If I were to look at all these
cards, would I find another 5
of hearts?
>>KAROL: If you would,
that would be amazing,
because that's the
only 5 of hearts we go.
They're all
scattered down there.
>>NOORY: We'll clean them.
We'll get them later
after the show.
>>KAROL: But anyway,
that's basically--
>>NOORY: That's amazing.
>>KAROL: That's basically
what it evolved into.
>>NOORY: I can't believe
I touched the inside
of your shoe, though.
>>KAROL: I know.
Well, see, that's what happens.
You're in the heat
of the moment.
I get you so-- pa!
That's what magic is all about.
>>NOORY: That is
absolutely incredible.
Jim's also great at memory
with like zip codes.
Watch this.
48125.
>>KAROL: That puts you
outside of Detroit, Michigan.
>>NOORY: That's right.
That's my mother's zip code.
>>KAROL: Really?
Wow.
>>NOORY: 91403.
>>KAROL: 91403.
91403.
That's Sherman Oaks.
That's out that way.
>>NOORY: That's right, exactly.
75219.
>>KAROL: 75219.
That puts you down by
Dallas, Texas, yeah, yeah.
>>NOORY: 89117.
>>KAROL: 89117 is
Las Vegas, Nevada.
And when we did
this on the radio--
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
Well, I got to tell you, when
you did this on the radio,
part of me said, Jim Karol's
sitting in front of a computer,
and as I spit these
zip codes out,
he enters them really fast.
And it just comes up.
How would I know, right?
>>KAROL: Yeah, that's true.
>>NOORY: But I had you
in the studio once.
>>KAROL: Yeah, that
was a lot of fun.
>>NOORY: And then
I said, well, there
may be something to this guy.
Now that I'm seeing these--
>>KAROL: Well, zip
codes are another thing.
Zip codes to me,
numbers-- like I
said, the most important
thing is, George,
I couldn't do any of this
before the age of 49.
>>NOORY: That's what's amazing.
>>KAROL: Yeah, when
I was in high school,
I barely made it
out of high school.
In fact, I flunked
chemistry, all right?
Then I went to a
community college.
And I was a criminal
justice major.
And I didn't do
well there, either.
So it's not like I'm this
gifted guy with this brain.
I trained my own brain at
the age of 49 to do all this.
>>NOORY: Can other
people do this?
>>KAROL: I believe anyone can
do this if you have passion.
You have to have the passion,
desire to want to do this.
You do.
I mean, it's crazy.
I mean, I go back and forth to
Walter Reed a lot right now,
and I help a lot of our
veterans of wars with PTSD.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>KAROL: And I help
them with the memory
and teach them magic.
In fact, the one
gentleman-- I don't
want to mention his
name or anything,
but he's been really getting
really good at magic.
>>NOORY: He loves it.
>>KAROL: He loves it.
He definitely loves it.
And I wouldn't be
surprised to see him
on a national TV show pretty
soon doing this stuff.
So this is really inspiring.
Magic is a great tool.
>>NOORY: Now, you
have another trick,
which is pretty darn dangerous.
It's a bear trap trick.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
Should we really pull that out?
Let's start with this one first.
Let's show them.
Is the progression.
See, I started with this.
>>NOORY: Ouch!
>>KAROL: Yeah, this is
only a fox trap, OK?
You have to walk before you run.
You don't get into
the big stuff.
Like hold your finger like that.
Hold your finger--
>>NOORY: No!
>>KAROL: No, no-- yeah,
I'll take it right off.
Just to feel the pressure.
>>NOORY: Yeah, you're
gonna take my finger off.
>>KAROL: No, no, I
would never hurt you.
You're a friend.
Just to feel the
pressure, watch.
And just verify that's
definitely real pressure.
>>NOORY: Ow. ow, ow, ow.
>>KAROL: So you know now.
>>NOORY: Ow, ow!
>>KAROL: Because
on the radio, you
would never know that's real.
>>NOORY: Ow!
>>KAROL: Now watch.
It's a real trap.
Now watch.
Now this one I
could set up here.
OK, because this
is real little, OK?
But there, this is how I
started, George, all right?
And then I would take
objects like pencils.
Here, here's a pencil here.
See, and you go like this just
to show that the trap is real.
>>NOORY: Jesus.
>>KAROL: It's definitely real.
The power on these things.
[SUCKING IN] OK, wow.
Now OK, George, are you ready?
That's why they call
me the Psychic Madman.
>>NOORY: That could
have hit me in the eye.
>>KAROL: I would stick my
fingers in here show after show
after show, but you know what?
It got boring.
Then moved on to this.
This is not a little fox trap.
>>NOORY: What the heck is this?
>>KAROL: This is an Alaskan
wolf trap or a small bear trap.
Now, if you want to walk
around, we could do this.
Watch.
We'll set the trap
right here on the floor,
because I can't just
open this like this.
Like try to open that, George.
Try to open that blade.
>>NOORY: Oh, that's hard.
>>KAROL: That takes
lots of pressure.
So what I usually do is-- here,
we'll put it right down here
like this.
And you can help me.
Just step on the two
ends of the trap.
>>NOORY: I weight 182.
>>KAROL: OK, now
push down real hard.
I'm gonna open--
[GRUNTS] OK, now get off.
I go it.
I got it.
Get off.
>>NOORY: Get off?
>>KAROL: Yeah, I got it.
See, it takes a lot of
pressure to set this.
If I go like this-- here, stop.
Now look, we're gonna bring
it up here on the table.
>>NOORY: Be careful.
That's like a mousetrap.
>>KAROL: Yeah, this
is a big mousetrap.
Now, this is the ultimate
in what I do, all right?
Now, I don't know if the
camera angle can catch this,
but we now have the trap set.
Let me take my ring off.
>>NOORY: What are
you going to do?
>>KAROL: I'm gonna stick
my hand in that trap.
>>NOORY: Oh, come on, Jim.
I want to ask you
a question first.
If for some horrible reason
you're stuck in this,
is there anything I
can do to help you?
I can't open it.
>>KAROL: Well, you're gonna have
to help me get out of it again.
We're gonna have to walk
around when I do just
by stepping on the ends again.
That's if I succeed.
Now, what I'm gonna do,
I'm gonna try something.
Since this is your show
and you're a special guy--
>>NOORY: Soon to be given
to you, because I don't
know if I want to see this.
>>KAROL: Now look, most
of the time I do this,
I let it catch me up here
on the meat of the hand.
I'm gonna let it catch
me on my fingers.
>>NOORY: It will take them off.
>>KAROL: No, I
don't think it will.
Watch.
We're gonna try.
>>NOORY: I don't think it will.
>>KAROL: Now watch.
I could put this cup in there,
and it will shatter the cup.
>>NOORY: Let me move this cup.
>>KAROL: Yeah, OK, now watch.
Now, they're real fingers,
right, George, nothing fake?
>>NOORY: They're real
fingers, no bananas.
>>KAROL: In fact, here--
give me your hand.
Watch.
>>NOORY: Oh, no, no, no.
>>KAROL: All right, just in
case, now watch. here we go.
Ready?
What's your lucky number?
>>NOORY: Four.
>>KAROL: On four, here we go.
One, two, three-- and I'm gonna
let it catch me on the fingers,
George, not up here on
the meat of the hand.
>>NOORY: This is
gonna snap on you?
>>KAROL: It's gonna snap.
Could I stand up?
>>NOORY: So I shouldn't freak.
>>KAROL: I don't know.
Let's come a little
closer to you here.
We'll go like this.
The pencil went like
that, so that's where
the fingers would go if I miss.
>>NOORY: Oh, good.
>>KAROL: All right now,
George, what I want you to do
is put your hand here as a
background, as a backdrop.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>KAROL: OK, and when I do
this, if I miss and you feel
something-- OK, here we go.
Now watch.
Look at his eyes.
Zoom in on those--
that's amazing.
Here we go.
Your lucky number is four.
Ready?
>>NOORY: Yes, sir.
>>KAROL: One, two,
three-- [SNAP]
>>NOORY: Ah.
>>KAROL: Now look,
as you notice,
it catches you right
on the fingers, too.
Now try to open those blades.
Pull those blades open.
Are they on there tight?
>>NOORY: Yes.
>>KAROL: This is the real--
the only way you would--
>>NOORY: Are you in pain?
>>KAROL: No, there's
no pain at all.
I block the pain off
completely, George.
This is what your
mind is capable of.
>>NOORY: How do we
get you out of this?
>>KAROL: Well, you're
gonna walk around here
because you gotta step on the
ends just like we did before.
Now, step on the ends.
>>NOORY: I've got to
release this for you.
>>KAROL: Step on it like that.
And we'll notice--
just pull it like that.
There it is.
Pain is all in
your mind, George.
>>NOORY: Jeez!
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What's it like to
be a mentalist?
>>KAROL: Oh, it's a blast.
I'll tell you, I'm
living my dream, I mean,
hanging out, getting to
meet so many amazing people,
professional athletes.
I'm working for a lot
of NBA clubs, NFL teams,
and meeting a lot
of celebrities.
Like every year I go
to the Super Bowl.
I do all the Super Bowl parties.
It's just the greatest thing.
It's amazing.
>>NOORY: What is it about magic?
What is it about mentalism
that people just love?
They love to be baffled.
>>KAROL: People
love to be baffled.
They love to be mystified.
And most people
don't want to know
how it's done, because
in magic, everything's
an illusion, where in mentalism,
there's that hidden realm of,
is it real?
Is not a trick?
See, and that's what I do.
I'm crossing over that
line now by getting
into the memory and the energy
and all this other stuff.
There's a lot of stuff I'm
doing right now that is real
that years ago, me
being a skeptic,
would have thought it was fake.
So it's amazing how it works.
>>NOORY: Jimmy, you've
been on "The Tonight Show."
You've been on "Coast
to Coast AM" with me.
You've been on Howard
Stern's program.
You've been on a lot of
major national programs.
Years ago, the
Amazing Kreskin used
to be one of Johnny Carson's
staples on "The Tonight Show."
But what he would do at the
end of his events in theaters
is he would give up
his fee if he could not
find out who was holding it.
And what he would
do is wander around
the entire stage of
audience and guess
what person had that envelope
with his money in it.
And if he was wrong, he let
the proprietors keep the money,
keep the check.
He got it right
most of the time.
Was that mentalism?
Or was there a trick here?
>>KAROL: Kreskin was probably,
my gosh, one of the best
if not the best
mentalist of my life.
I've seen him numerous times.
And he's still performing.
It's amazing.
>>NOORY: So there wasn't another
guy there, he had an earpiece?
>>KAROL: No, no, no.
>>NOORY: I just walked to row
number four, go to the left.
There's a guy named
Jim Karol there.
You see with the
sunglasses on his head?
He's the one who's
got your money.
They don't do that?
>>KAROL: I'm sure
maybe somebody might.
Magicians could possibly do it.
But Kreskin never--
Kreskin was the best.
He was the best.
And are a lot of
great mentalists today
that from time to time I don't
even know what they're doing.
And I take a lot of pride in
knowing how everything is done.
You can't show me trick
that I've never seen.
Nothing's new, all right?
But there are some guys
that are really good,
and Kreskin was one of them.
>>NOORY: Well, how do
you read 500 people
to know that that guy
has got your money?
>>KAROL: It's amazing
you're saying that,
because that's basically
what I got into now.
Some people call it emotional
intelligence, the ability
to read nonverbal clues
that people throw off.
And you can use it for
therapeutic reasons
as well, like helping
to read stress on people
and how to handle it and
everything like that.
I take it to the entertainment
aspect by reading people.
And I'm assuming maybe
that's what Kreskin did.
He walked around
and he read people,
I don't know, different actions.
We can show you some
experiments with that.
>>NOORY: So if
you're on a date, you
could read your
date's face to see
how things are going, right?
>>KAROL: Believe it or not,
you could, just by the way
they sit, like if
you cross your legs,
if you're facing towards you.
I like to read the eyes.
That's why I wear these glasses.
People say, what do you have
these sunglasses everywhere
you go?
They're prescription, George.
These are very powerful
prescription sunglasses.
Like right now, I
can see your pupils.
>>NOORY: Am I trying to look
at you or you're looking at me?
>>KAROL: I'm looking right
into your pupils right now.
>>NOORY: And what do you see?
>>KAROL: Well, here's the deal.
Like say we were
playing poker right now.
>>NOORY: All right.
Is that why these
guys wear glasses?
>>KAROL: The guys wear glasses,
in my opinion, most of them
wear them to protect
you from doing what I'm
about to show you right now.
In other words, like say I
dealt you two cards right now
in poker.
>>NOORY: Let's do it.
>>KAROL: Let's do it.
OK, here, watch.
I won't need the cards
for this specific thing.
Now watch.
Once again, we'll mix up
the cards a little bit.
You don't like
shuffling, but cut them.
Which camera should I show?
>>NOORY: Right there.
>>KAROL: And the cards are
shuffled up, all right?
Now, George, you're going to
pick a card out of the deck.
All you have to do is say no
whenever I ask you a question.
Because first I'm going
to start by trying
to read a verbal clue from you.
And then we'll get
into the nonverbal.
Like take one of the
cards, anyone you want.
>>NOORY: Just one, OK.
>>KAROL: And look at it.
Now, no matter what I ask
you, say no, all right?
And once again, we'll
show no two are alike.
It's not a trick deck.
>>NOORY: All right, even
if I'm lying say no?
>>KAROL: Always say
no to everything
I'm going to ask you
from this point one.
You know what the
card is, right?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Good, see?
See that?
Now, if you look at the face,
your face, your eyes crinkle,
your difference.
Now watch.
Ready?
George, is your
name George Noory?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: See, now I got
the read of what you
look like when you tell a lie.
Therefore, I would say
right now, George, it
is impossible for me to
not do this correctly.
Ready?
If I had Kreskin's paycheck
right now, and I would mess up,
I would give it to you.
Ready?
That's what we're gonna do.
Is that card a club?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is that card
a diamond, George?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is that card a heart?
>>KAROL: Now you see?
Did you feel yourself
go-- you like--
>>NOORY: I paused for a minute.
>>KAROL: Yeah, yeah.
So it's definitely-- OK.
So we definitely--
>>NOORY: Because I
wanted to say yes.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
So now, OK, so it's
a heart, right?
OK, so I was right.
Now watch.
Here, take a different one.
We'll go one step further.
Isn't that neat the way
you caught yourself even?
Any one, and now
look at it again.
Don't show it to
the cameras yet.
Just remember that card.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>KAROL: Is this card a club?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is it a heart?
>>KAROL: You rushed
this time, and you
tilted your head to the side,
so I would say it's a heart.
But let's go further than that.
Is it a numbered card?
You have to say no.
Just by the confusion
means it's a number.
>>NOORY: Yeah, I'm confused.
What do you mean by numbered?
>>KAROL: Number,
like 2 or is it a--?
OK.
Is it a 2?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: 3?
>>KAROL: 4?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: 5?
>>KAROL: Now, just by
the way you went, no,
and then you started blinking,
I would say you lied.
So therefore, I would
say that's a 5 of heart.
>>NOORY: It's a 5 of heart.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: Let's do one more, Jim.
>>KAROL: All right.
I knew you'd love this one.
>>NOORY: That's cause
I'm learning this.
>>KAROL: It's all reading
the eyes and the faces
and reading the verbal clues.
>>NOORY: I'm trying
to be a good liar.
>>KAROL: Now look at it.
Lie your best.
Try your best to lie.
No matter what I
ask, you say no.
Is that a club?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is it a heart?
>>KAROL: Is it a spade?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Did you
hear your voice like
go-- like a little
crack in your voice?
>>NOORY: Well, I was going
to change it as I went.
>>KAROL: All right, so
I know it's a spade,
but this time really
try to fight this.
Is it a 10?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is it jack?
>>KAROL: Is it higher?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: It's higher.
That means it's either a
king, a queen, or an ace.
I'm gonna get this.
Is it an ace?
>>NOORY: [LAUGHING] No.
>>KAROL: Is it a king?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Now, a king, you
have a lot of movement
and you relaxed
because you thought
I missed the ace previously.
So I'd say it's
an ace of spades.
>>NOORY: Ace of spades.
>>KAROL: This is it.
>>NOORY: I'm taking
you to Vegas.
I'm gonna bankroll you.
And we're gonna win millions.
>>KAROL: I'll tell you what.
This is so much fun.
I have such a blast with this.
>>NOORY: One more.
>>KAROL: One more?
All right, here.
Take one.
>>NOORY: I don't want to take
up the whole show on this,
because you've got more to do.
>>KAROL: Yeah, but
this is so cool.
It's really a challenge.
And look, you can see.
I'll spread the cards out.
>>NOORY: You know what?
What if I don't
look at the card?
>>KAROL: Oh.
Now you might have me.
>>NOORY: Let's do it again.
>>KAROL: Oh, but then how am I
going to know if you're lying
or not?
You have to know it.
>>NOORY: Let's do it again.
>>KAROL: Oh, now you're going
into the supernatural realm
of mentalism.
>>NOORY: Now I want to get you.
>>KAROL: All right,
let's try it.
Take one, any one you want.
So now, therefore, you won't
be able to lie this time,
all right?
So I can't say, is it a club?
Is it--?
So I'll ask you like this.
If you were to guess
right now, would you
say that card is red or black?
>>NOORY: What happened to no?
>>KAROL: Because you don't know
what it is, so I can't ask.
You what would you guess?
>>NOORY: You want me to guess?
>>KAROL: Yeah.
Without looking at
the card, would you
say it's red or black?
>>NOORY: I'd say it's red.
>>KAROL: OK.
I'm just trying to show the
impossibility of what I'm
doing, because it's not red.
It's black.
>>NOORY: You're
telling me it's black.
>>KAROL: Oh, without a doubt.
>>NOORY: I'm telling
you it's red.
>>KAROL: Even guessing the color
is hard, is what I'm saying.
>>NOORY: You're trying to
trick me to look at it,
and I'm not going to.
>>KAROL: [LAUGHS] All right.
Now, I'm saying it's black.
Now, would you say
it's a club or a spade?
>>NOORY: I still think it's red.
>>KAROL: No, I say it's-- ace.
Put your hand on the card.
Ace, king-- was the camera on
George when I just did this?
>>NOORY: Of course
the camera's on me.
>>KAROL: You blinked on king.
>>NOORY: I don't even
know what the card is.
>>KAROL: I doesn't matter.
This just like unconscious.
I would say it's
the king of spades.
>>NOORY: You're saying
it's the king of spades?
>>KAROL: I guarantee it is.
Yeah.
>>NOORY: It's the
king of spades.
>>KAROL: Yes.
That's where the
emotional intelligence is.
>>NOORY: You tricked me.
>>KAROL: That's my version of--
>>NOORY: You put this
in my hand somehow.
>>KAROL: No!
Here, look, we don't want to
waste a lot of time on this,
but one more time, look.
I'm not saying, here, George,
take a card like that.
Take a card, any card.
>>NOORY: I didn't
even look at the card.
>>KAROL: It doesn't matter.
It doesn't matter if
you want to look at it
or you don't want to look at it.
>>NOORY: I don't
want to look at it.
>>KAROL: All right.
Put your hand like that.
Now, I wish the camera was
zoomed in on your eyes.
Watch-- club, heart,
diamond, spade.
All right, now watch.
Look at me.
2, 3, 4.
Now see on 4 you went like that.
You're knowing the card
without me telling you.
It's a four of heart.
Check it out.
It's amazing.
Did you feel yourself
go like that?
You went-- did you
feel your eyes go?
If not, look at the tape later.
Your eyes actually went up.
>>NOORY: Well, I know that.
>>KAROL: But let's get
into something different.
All right, what else?
>>NOORY: Jeez, that's amazing.
>>KAROL: This is like nothing.
This is like kiddie stuff.
>>NOORY: Is that
magic or mentalism?
>>KAROL: This takes mentalism
to a different level, all right?
>>NOORY: Is there a
little magic in there?
Come on.
>>KAROL: No, in
that there isn't.
This is mentalism and the
new thing that I'm doing.
It's really--
>>NOORY: Well done.
Jim, I gotta tell you.
You should be on "The
Tonight Show" every month.
>>KAROL: I'm gonna try that.
Hey, watch this.
Take it to a step further.
We use another object
they use in casinos.
>>NOORY: Dice.
>>KAROL: They use cards.
That's good for
poker, blackjack.
>>NOORY: Are you tell me
that you're going to teach me
how to roll sevens?
>>KAROL: We'll do
something different.
You don't have to
roll the dice, George.
I'm gonna turn my head like
this and look over here.
You place the die on your
table in front of you,
any number you want.
Remember the number, face
up, and cover it with the cup
so I can't see it.
Let me know when it's covered.
And these young ladies here
will know I have my eyes closed.
Is it covered?
Let me know if it's covered.
>>NOORY: Yup.
>>KAROL: Is it a 6?
Say no.
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: A 5?
>>KAROL: A 4?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Nice.
Do you hear the
difference in the tone?
4.
Did you hear that?
>>NOORY: It sounded
the same to me.
>>KAROL: No, you
went, no, no, no.
>>NOORY: I'm gonna lunge at you.
>>KAROL: It's a
4, guaranteed-- 4.
So now do it one more time.
Now he's getting mad at me.
Flip the tin.
I'll hide.
Flip any number-- go.
>>NOORY: I'll get
my boys in Chicago.
>>KAROL: Let me know when
it's covered, George.
>>NOORY: Covered.
>>KAROL: Is a 1?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: Is it a 2?
>>KAROL: 3?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: 4?
>>KAROL: 5?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: 6?
>>KAROL: 5?
>>NOORY: No.
>>KAROL: 5.
5.
>>NOORY: Now how
did you know that?
I didn't change my voice.
>>KAROL: It doesn't matter.
This is what I do.
I'm reading your clues,
nonverbal and verbal.
>>NOORY: Let me try it.
>>KAROL: All right, go ahead.
Do it again.
Oh, you wanna try it?
>>NOORY: You said you were.
>>KAROL: Turn around.
Go.
>>NOORY: Is it a 1?
>>KAROL: No.
>>NOORY: 2?
>>NOORY: 3?
>>KAROL: No.
>>NOORY: 4?
>>NOORY: 5?
>>KAROL: No.
>>NOORY: 6?
>>NOORY: 1?
>>KAROL: No.
>>NOORY: 2?
>>NOORY: It's a 2.
>>KAROL: Right.
See?
You got it, man!
>>NOORY: See?
>>KAROL: Isn't that amazing?
This is what we do,
I'm telling you.
You just hang out with me,
you're gonna learn this stuff.
When you go to your--
>>NOORY: Did I guess it, or
did you plant a 2 in there?
>>KAROL: I don't know.
You tell me. [LAUGHING]
>>NOORY: I'm not sure.
>>KAROL: This is cool,
George, isn't it?
Now how would I possibly be
able to control your mind
to know it's a 2?
>>NOORY: You probably couldn't.
>>KAROL: See?
So.
>>NOORY: I'm very free-willed.
>>KAROL: Isn't this
cool stuff, though?
This is really cool.
>>NOORY: And you
call this emotional--
>>KAROL: I take it-- this is
beyond emotional intelligence,
what I'm showing you now.
Emotional intelligence
is more of a cycle.
It's more of a psychology to
help people and everything else
to handle stress
and everything else.
This is beyond that.
I use emotional
intelligence as a tool
to get to where
I'm at right now.
>>NOORY: What are
you tapping into?
Are you tapping into this
cosmic force that's out there?
What are you doing?
>>KAROL: A lot of stuff
I'm doing is gut feelings.
Now, a lot of people say,
yeah, he's just a magician.
He's pulling a trick on George.
It doesn't matter.
You know.
How could it be a magic
trick to know 80,000 zip
codes or 70,000 digits of pi?
Some of the stuff
started off as magic,
but now it's evolved
into this weird thing.
And let me tell you
something, George,
when I get down in my
basement and I lift weights,
I'm lifting weights
right now like a maniac,
like I'm 25 again.
I'm going down there-- I started
bending the spikes again,
like remember Mighty Atom I
used to-- I'm bending them now.
This is crazy.
I'm 62 years old.
>>NOORY: All with mentalism.
>>KAROL: Yes.
It's all with this realm that
I got into of the brain, OK?
Like now I'm studying the
brain, like the amygdala,
the hippocampus,
and all this stuff.
I know all your lobes
and all this other stuff.
And I'm trying to obtain as
much knowledge as possible
to try to figure
out what I'm doing.
>>NOORY: Well, how much
of this is the brain?
How much of this is tapping
into something that's out there?
>>KAROL: Here's my theory.
This is just my theory, OK?
Think about this a second.
We have the universe.
We have billions and billions
and billions of stars.
Well, guess what?
In our brains are billions
and billions and billions
of neurons.
To me, it's the same.
Our neurons are like
the stars in our brain.
You have dark holes
in the universe.
In our brain we have dark holes,
like we have this substantia
nigra region in
your basal ganglia,
and that's where
Parkinson's disease forms.
I think they're a
tool of the same,
and we're just beginning to
learn about both of them,
all right?
And I'm into this
brain so big right now,
and that's where I'm taking
all these memory abilities.
This is the serious
part of Jim Karol now.
It's not the magical part.
I'm really studying this.
And it's really amazing.
And I use these experiments
and demonstrations
to catch the attention
and create awareness,
get the people interested
in studying the brain
and improving
their brain health.
>>NOORY: Do we all have
this ability that you have?
>>KAROL: Everybody.
Let me tell you a story.
One of the biggest components
of high emotional intelligence
is self-esteem and confidence.
Without that, you're never
going to obtain this.
When I was young and when
I went to high school,
I was bullied and picked on
and beat up all the time.
And look, I'm a big guy.
So I was a target.
All these guys wanted
to pick on the big guy,
because it makes you
look tougher, right?
This continued all the
way through high school
and everything else, all right?
And then when I started
working at the steel mill
and met that magician and
learned some card tricks
and seen the reaction of
people, it's like, wow!
>>NOORY: You loved it.
>>KAROL: I loved the reaction.
And I began to be
able to look people
in the eye, which is
another important thing
of emotional intelligence,
because if you don't look
in their eyes, you're not
going to be able to read them,
all right?
So magic was my tool
to where I'm at now.
And anybody can do this.
If I could do it as a steel
worker who barely made it
through high school and
flunked out of college,
I think anybody can do this.
It's really bizarre.
>>NOORY: My executive
producer is back
in the studio control room.
And he's just asked me if he
tells me a card in my ear,
would you be able to guess that?
>>KAROL: I could try.
Now watch.
>>NOORY: This is tough.
>>KAROL: We'll put the die away.
Now think about it.
Is this Tommy we're
talking about?
>>NOORY: Yeah,
yeah, Tommy's back
there, hasn't given
me the card yet.
>>KAROL: Tell him
to forget that card.
Tell him to forget it.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>KAROL: Now, tell him to
just imagine he has the card.
We're gonna try to play
with his imagination.
>>NOORY: 52 cards,
he's shuffling them up.
>>KAROL: And he's within
30 feet of here, right?
Could he hear me when I talk?
>>NOORY: He's listening
to you right now.
>>KAROL: Tommy, shuffle
those cards in your brain.
>>NOORY: All right.
He's shuffling them right now.
>>KAROL: This is gonna
blow Tommy away now.
Watch.
Tommy, remove one of your
imaginary cards-- better still,
George, while we're
doing this, here.
Just hold on to this.
Hold on to that.
All right, now we have all kind
of decks of cards on us here
and stuff like that just to make
sure we have a bunch of decks.
OK, we have three decks.
We can just keep that one.
We don't need these.
Now Tommy, do the
same thing we did.
Make believe you have
this deck of cards,
and remove one card
from that deck.
>>NOORY: He's done it.
>>KAROL: Are you done?
Now put it back in your
imaginary deck upside down,
Tommy.
Just put it back in upside down.
Is it done?
>>NOORY: OK, he's done it.
>>KAROL: Now, George,
you're holding these cards
all the while.
Look.
This is a real deck of cards.
Which camera should I use
once again, right there?
>>NOORY: Right there.
>>KAROL: OK, now,
George, Tommy, what
was that imaginary
card you placed upside
down in your imaginary deck?
>>NOORY: Yeah, tell
me in my ear, Tom.
OK.
>>KAROL: What is it?
>>NOORY: King of clubs.
>>KAROL: King of clubs?
You're not gonna believe this.
Take the Joker out.
This is a real deck of cards,
so I'm gonna fan them like this.
Now, out of all the
cards Tommy named,
he said the king
of clubs, right?
Tommy, I'm going to give
you one last chance.
Ready?
Name an odd number
right now, Tommy.
Go.
>>NOORY: 7.
>>KAROL: Now, you want to
keep with clubs, Tommy,
or you want to go hears,
diamonds, or spades?
>>NOORY: He's staying.
>>KAROL: Staying with clubs?
>>NOORY: Staying with clubs.
>>KAROL: You're not going
to believe this, George.
Look.
One and only one card
in this deck-- I'm
doing it in slow motion, Tommy.
Out of all the
cards you could have
named-- look at this, Tommy.
Do you see any upside down?
I do.
George, pull it out.
>>NOORY: Here we are.
7 of clubs.
>>KAROL: Isn't that amazing?
But this is what
you could learn.
That I could teach you.
>>NOORY: And Tom, I
know you like a brother.
There's no way you and
Jim played this out.
>>KAROL: And he's changed his
mind, even, a couple times.
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
I want to see one
more from you, Jimmy.
It's called some kind of spike?
>>KAROL: Oh, my gosh.
>>NOORY: What the heck is this?
>>KAROL: We'll clear this off.
That is a little dangerous.
I'm going to you a
story, all right?
I'm gonna get this spike out.
>>NOORY: And then I'll
tell you one of mine.
>>KAROL: Oh, my God.
You got a story about a spike?
>>NOORY: I sure do, too.
>>KAROL: We'll get some more
Styrofoam cups out here.
We'll use two.
Make sure they're empty, George.
Check them out, all right?
And we'll use these two blocks.
Take my glasses off the table.
We'll move this out
of the way here.
We don't want any distractions.
And here is the spike.
Now, this is like the
top of a railroad spike.
You can feel how
pointy, very sharp.
>>NOORY: That's sharp.
>>KAROL: All right, now,
what's going to happen
is you're going to
put it in-- and we'll
use this camera when you do
it-- one of these things.
And you're going
to cover like that.
And I'm gonna know where it is.
And then we're going to teach
you how to do this, all right?
Now, before I do it,
here's the story.
Tell me your story first.
>>NOORY: Well, mine, when
I was a television producer
back in Detroit,
1978, 1979, we had
paper spikes, where you
would put your papers on when
you were done.
You would just
put it down there,
and the spike would
come through there.
And you'd have all
your papers there.
Well, I had a whole pack,
and I missed the spike,
and it went right through my
hand, right through here, right
through there, sticking out.
And it was just like that,
and I didn't even know it,
because I didn't feel any pain.
>>KAROL: Yeah,
you don't feel it.
>>NOORY: And my director-- he's
screaming, George, look, look!
And I look, and
I go, oh, my God!
I got this spike sticking
right out of my hand.
I lift it up and pulled
it out just like that.
So when you told me about this
spike trick or whatever it is--
>>KAROL: Well, let me
tell you something.
I was doing this very
sharp spike-- and look
at how thick it
is-- at a college.
1,000 times I've done
this in my career
and I haven't had a problem.
It was an early show.
I come to the school.
I got up at 5:30 in the
morning to drive there.
So I was half asleep.
It was an early morning
show, like 11 o'clock.
I have this set up like this.
That's why I only use
two now instead of three.
I had three of them set up.
I smashed the cups,
actually, at that show.
And I hit the spike, and
the front row was like--
>>NOORY: It went right through?
>>KAROL: Well, listen.
I looked down.
I didn't feel it, like you said.
You don't feel it.
Yeah, I know.
But this sucker is
so big, you know?
I look down at the
top of my hand,
and I just seen a
little red dot of blood.
So the spike didn't--
>>NOORY: It didn't do
all the way through.
>>KAROL: The point
started coming through,
and when I turned my hand
up, the whole big thickness
was sticking out.
>>NOORY: Oh!
>>KAROL: And as you can see,
this is where it happened.
She sewed it up really good.
So that's why I haven't
done this for years.
>>NOORY: What went wrong?
>>KAROL: Lack of focus.
The key to emotional
intelligence is focus.
Trust me.
You have to focus.
Like a lot of people say,
hey, we have a memory problem.
I don't know where
I parked my car.
Is not because you
have a memory problem.
You didn't think when you
were parking your car.
Do you know what
I'm trying to say?
When you get out
of the car, you're
on your cell phone,
blah, blah, blah.
You go in the mall.
You shop.
And you come out,
where's my car?
Oh, my memory is poor.
No, it's not your memory.
It's your focus.
And I didn't focus here.
And if I don't focus here now,
we could have the same problem.
Here.
Here are two cups, all right?
>>NOORY: All right.
So you've got basically
a 50-50 chance here.
>>KAROL: A 50-50 chance.
So I'm gonna turn
my back once again.
Take this spike.
You're gonna put it
in one of these holes.
We'll put these down for now.
And then cover both of them.
You can switch the
cups if you want.
Let me know when
it's covered, though.
Is it covered?
>>NOORY: Not yet.
>>KAROL: All right, and
there's no mirrors back here.
I can't see where it is.
It's definitely under
one of those cups, right?
>>NOORY: Of course.
>>KAROL: OK.
Now watch.
Do you know where the cup is?
>>NOORY: Oh, you're
playing off me.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
>>NOORY: I know where it is.
If I'm wrong, you're screwed.
>>KAROL: Yeah.
I don't think it's that one!
Oh, my gosh!
I was right, George!
We are lucky!
Did you see that facial
expression he had?
That was amazing.
All right.
So anyway, but this is
what-- I trusted in you.
>>NOORY: So it's all about me.
>>KAROL: Yeah, it
was about you there.
And we're gonna do the
same thing right now.
You're gonna do it.
>>NOORY: Oh, no, no.
>>KAROL: No, no, you have to do
this to end this show, George.
Please trust me.
Trust me.
>>NOORY: No, no.
>>KAROL: George,
you'll be all right.
We're gonna use that
camera coming at you.
>>NOORY: All right, all right.
I'm not gonna slam
my hand like yours.
>>KAROL: No, no.
Here we go.
I'm gonna put it.
You have to slam
your hand, George.
>>NOORY: No!
>>KAROL: George, you have to.
>>KAROL: Close your eyes.
Make sure those eyes are closed.
>>NOORY: Let's have Ellie do it.
I'm not gonna do it.
How about Jay?
Get Jay in here.
>>KAROL: All right, ready?
I'm gonna put it
under one of them.
No, no, don't look yet!
Don't look!
We don't want you to see
which one it's under.
All right, all right, turn
around, George, turn around.
Now look at me in the eyes.
Trust me.
You're confident.
Hold your hand up
above one of the cups.
Trust me, George.
Hold your hand up.
Hold it up real high, and slam
it down as hard as you can!
>>NOORY: Ah!
>>KAROL: Ah!
He did it!
Unbelievable!
Is that amazing, George?
Pick it up and you'll see.
Ah, come on.
I'm not gonna hurt you, George.
Here it is under here.
All right, but that was a rush.
You got a rush there.
That's what the
show's all about.
>>NOORY: You set me up.
>>KAROL: All right, man.
>>NOORY: Jeez.
Now let me ask you the question.
Why didn't you try
me with the spike?
>>KAROL: Why would I do that?
>>NOORY: Because I might
have made a mistake?
>>KAROL: Well, let's it.
Here.
>>NOORY: No!
No, no, no, no.
>>KAROL: No, here.
We'll do it here.
We'll see.
Let's see what
would have happened.
>>NOORY: What would
have happened?
I won't do it.
>>KAROL: We won't do
anything dangerous.
No, no, you're gonna do it.
>>NOORY: But I'll pick
the one I was going to.
>>KAROL: No, you're
gonna do it, but we're
gonna put something under
that won't hurt you.
>>NOORY: What are you gonna do?
>>KAROL: Let's see.
We'll put a playing card inside
one of the things like this.
All right, turn around
and close your eyes.
>>NOORY: All right.
>>KAROL: All right, don't peek.
>>NOORY: I'm not peeking.
>>KAROL: All right,
now turn back around.
Now visualize-- now, that
playing card is a spike.
Smash one of those cups!
Because you're really
not gonna get hurt.
>>NOORY: I wanna smash the
one that won't hurt me.
>>KAROL: Yeah, smash it--
real hard, You gotta-- oh!
>>NOORY: That's it.
>>KAROL: You see why I don't--
>>NOORY: It would have
been through the spike.
>>KAROL: That's exactly
why I don't do it that way,
just in case, George.
You see?
>>NOORY: Unbelievable.
Jim, if people want to track
you, what's your website?
How do they find you?
>>KAROL: Just my name, Jim
Karol, K-A-R-O-L, jimkarol.com.
>>NOORY: You are
absolutely amazing.
>>KAROL: And I'm starting a
foundation, too, Brain Wellness
Foundation.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>KAROL: To help people.
>>NOORY: Whatever we can do
for you, you let me know.
>>KAROL: You're awesome.
Thanks.
>>NOORY: Jeez.
You know, had this
been a real spike,
it would have been
through my hand.
I think I'll leave the
mentalism to Jim Karol.
I'm George Noory, and thanks
for watching "Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]